docs/programming/devops/helm.md, before:

# Guide For Helm

## **1. Helm Daily Workflow**

### - A. list all your charts

You start out by listing all your charts with:

```bash
helm ls
```

### - B. Delete a deployment + service

You can uninstall any of the listed charts using:

```bash
helm uninstall CHART_NAME
```

### - C. Create a new chart-template with deployment+service for an app

```bash
helm create CHART_NAME
```

### - D. Provision a deployment+service for the first time

```bash
helm install CHART_NAME . --values values.yaml --debug --verify -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace
```

Or by using force:

```bash
helm install CHART_NAME . --values values.yaml --debug --verify -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace --force
```

### - E. Keep track of an installation progress

```bash
helm status CHART_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

### - F. Upgrade (update) a chart's revision

```bash
helm upgrade CHART_NAME . --values values.yaml -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace
```

### - G. Abort unsuccessful upgrade of a chart

When an upgrade is unsuccessful, and the `rollingUpdate` seems to fail, you might need to abort the upgrade. Here's how you do it:

If you know the **revision number** of the current successful chart, simply **rollback** to it:

```bash
helm rollback CHART_NAME REVISION_NUMBER -n NAMESPACE
```

If you need to check the current revision number, you can use the **history** command:

```bash
helm history backend -n NAMESPACE
```

---

## **2. Helm Commands**

### - Command 1: helm ls

**- The command:**

```bash
helm ls -n NAMESPACE
```

Or...

```bash
helm list -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

This command lists all of the releases for a specified namespace (uses current namespace context if namespace not specified).

<br/>

### - Command 2: helm uninstall

**- The command:**

```bash
helm uninstall RELEASE_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

Uninstall a release.

This command takes a release name and uninstalls the release. It removes all of the resources associated with the last release of the chart as well as the release history, freeing it up for future use.

<br/>

### - Command 3: helm install

**- The command:**

```bash
helm install chart_nickname path/to/root --values path/to/values.yaml -n NAMESPACE --debug
```

**- Description:**

This command installs a **chart** archive, and gives it a **nickname** which you provide.

- The `-f`, `--values` flags specify values in a YAML file or a URL (can specify multiple).
- The `--debug` flag enables verbose output.
- The `--dry-run` flag simulates an install. `--dry-run` is similar to `--dry-run=client`, which means that it will not attempt cluster connections, while setting `--dry-run=server` attempts to connect the cluster.
- The `--force` flag forces resource updates through a replacement strategy.
- The `--verify` flag verifies the package before using it.
- The `--wait` flag will wait until all Pods, PVCs, Services, and minimum number of Pods of a Deployment, StatefulSet, or ReplicaSet are in a **ready state** before marking the release as **successful**. It will wait for as long as `--timeout`.

The install argument must be a **chart reference**, a **path to a packaged chart**, a **path to an unpacked chart directory**, or a **URL**.

**When using a path to an unpacked chart directory:**

1. The `root` directory must include a `Chart.yaml` file.
2. Inside that `Chart.yaml` file, you **MUST** specify:
   - a `name` field
   - an `version` field
3. The `root` directory needs to include a folder named `templates`. This isn't required per-say, since the operation won't fail if one does not exist. However, even though running `helm ls` would show that a chart has been created, nothing would actually be deployed to your cluster! So while technically it is not required, it _is_ sort of required.
4. The `templates` folder is where you include all your yaml files, whether it be a config for a **deployment**, or a **service**, or a **configmap**. The names of the files don't matter, since kubernetes/helm looks inside the file and derives what resource it is based on its `Kind`.
5. The root folder may include a `values.yaml` file, to which you would point when invoking the `install` command, along with the flag of `--values`.

**Another way to set values**

To override values in a chart, use either the '--values' flag and pass in a file or use the '--set' flag and pass configuration from the command line, to force a string value use '--set-string'. You can use '--set-file' to set individual values from a file when the value itself is too long for the command line or is dynamically generated. You can also use '--set-json' to set json values (scalars/objects/arrays) from the command line.

**- Example Usage:**

```bash
helm install user ./user --values ./user/values.yaml -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace
```

<br/>

### - Command 4: helm status

**- The command: status**

```bash
helm status CHART_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

The `helm status` commands is useful when using the `helm install` command. When running `helm install`, Helm does not wait until all of the resources are running before it exits. Many charts require Docker images that are over 600MB in size, and may take a long time to install into the cluster. So, to keep track of a release's state, or to re-read configuration information, you can use `helm status`.

Display the status of the named release.

This command shows the status of a named release. The status consists of:

- last deployment time

- k8s namespace in which the release lives

- state of the release (can be: unknown, deployed, uninstalled, superseded, failed, uninstalling, pending-install, pending-upgrade or pending-rollback)

- revision of the release

- description of the release (can be completion message or error message, need to enable --show-desc)

- list of resources that this release consists of (need to enable --show-resources)

- details on last test suite run, if applicable

- additional notes provided by the chart

<br/>

### - Command 5: helm create

**- The command:**

```bash
helm create CHART_NAME
```

**- Description:**

create a new **chart** with the given name.

This command creates a chart directory along with the common files and directories used in a chart. `helm create` takes a _path_ for an argument. If directories in the given path do not exist, Helm will attempt to create them as it goes. If the given destination exists and there are files in that directory, conflicting files will be overwritten, but other files will be left alone.

For example, `helm create foo` will create a directory structure that looks something like this:

```
foo/
├── .helmignore   # Contains patterns to ignore when packaging Helm charts.
├── Chart.yaml    # Information about your chart
├── values.yaml   # The default values for your templates
├── charts/       # Charts that this chart depends on
└── templates/    # The template files
    └── tests/    # The test files
```

<br/>

### - Command 6: helm upgrade

**- The command:**

```bash
helm upgrade my-app path/to/root/ --values path/to/values.yaml -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

<br/>

### - Command 999: helm history

**- The command:**

```bash
helm history RELEASE_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

Fetch a release's history.

`history` prints out historical revisions for a given release. A default maximum of 256 revisions will be returned. Setting `--max` configures the maximum length of the revision list returned.

<br/>

### - Command 999: helm rollback

**- The command:**

```bash
helm rollback RELEASE_NAME REVISION_NUMBER -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

Roll back a release to a previous revision.

The first argument of the rollback command is the name of a release, and the second is a revision (version) number. _If this argument is omitted or set to 0, it will roll back to the **previous** release_.

<br/>

### - Command 999: helm package

**- The command:**

```bash
helm package path/to/root [flags] --version VERSION_NUMBER --debug
```

**- Description:**

Package a chart directory into a chart archive.

This command packages a chart into a **versioned** chart archive file. If a path is given, this will look at that path for a chart (which must contain a `Chart.yaml` file) and then package that directory.

Versioned chart archives are used by Helm package repositories.

To sign a chart, use the '--sign' flag. In most cases, you should also provide '--keyring path/to/secret/keys' and '--key keyname'.

```bash
helm package --sign ./mychart --key mykey --keyring ~/.gnupg/secring.gpg
```

If '--keyring' is not specified, Helm usually defaults to the public keyring unless your environment is otherwise configured.

<br/>

---

## 3. Helm Architecture

Prerequisites:

1. A Kubernetes cluster
2. Deciding what security configurations to apply to your installation, if any
3. Installing and configuring Helm.
4. You must have Kubernetes installed. For the latest release of Helm, we recommend the latest stable release of Kubernetes, which in most cases is the second-latest minor release.

Helm has 3 big concepts to it:

### - Concept 1: Chart

A **Chart** is a Helm package. It contains all of the resource definitions necessary to run an application, tool, or service inside of a Kubernetes cluster. Think of it like the Kubernetes equivalent of a Homebrew formula, an Apt dpkg, or a Yum RPM file.

### - Concept 2: Repository

A **Repository** is the place where charts can be collected and shared. It's like Perl's CPAN archive or the Fedora Package Database, but for Kubernetes packages.

### - Concept 3: Release

A **Release** is _an instance of a **chart**_ running inside a Kubernetes cluster. One chart can often be installed many times into the same cluster. And each time it is installed, a new **release** is created. Consider a MySQL chart. If you want two databases running in your cluster, you can install that chart twice. Each one will have its own **release**, which will in turn have its own _release name_.

With these concepts in mind, we can now explain Helm like this:

Helm installs **charts** into Kubernetes, creating a new **release** for each installation. And to find new charts, you can search Helm chart **repositories**.

helm show values

---

## **4. What is helm?**

**Helm** is a **package manager** for **kubernetes**, that makes it easy to take applications and services that are highly repeatable or get used in a lot of different scenarios and it makes it easier to deploy them to a typical kubernetes cluster.
chart = template
Your chart is going to consist of all the files that you're going to be template'ing here.
Helm talks to a component that needs to be installed on your kubernetes cluster called **Tiller**. Tiller is basically just the server-side component of helm. It's gonna take the commands you've sent with helm client, and turn it into something that your kubernetes cluster will understand. Now, this becomes extra useful when you wanna doo things like "upgrade to a new configuration" or "rollback to an older version".
What Helm will also give you is that it actually keeps a version history for you of different configurations you've sent over the wire with help, so you can rollback to the last known working configuration whenever you want to.
Good things to template:

- the `namespace`
- the `selector` name
- the `image`:
  - its `name`
  - its `tag`
- the `configmap.name`
  Create a NOTES.txt file, which outputs to the user on every upgrade command.
  This file could also be templated.
  You can create 1 values.yaml file for production and one for development.

Commit message:

helm guide: added tiller description

docs/programming/devops/helm.md, after:

# Guide For Helm

## **1. Helm Daily Workflow**

### - A. list all your charts

You start out by listing all your charts with:

```bash
helm ls
```

### - B. Delete a deployment + service

You can uninstall any of the listed charts using:

```bash
helm uninstall CHART_NAME
```

### - C. Create a new chart-template with deployment+service for an app

```bash
helm create CHART_NAME
```

### - D. Provision a deployment+service for the first time

```bash
helm install CHART_NAME . --values values.yaml --debug --verify -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace
```

Or by using force:

```bash
helm install CHART_NAME . --values values.yaml --debug --verify -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace --force
```

### - E. Keep track of an installation progress

```bash
helm status CHART_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

### - F. Upgrade (update) a chart's revision

```bash
helm upgrade CHART_NAME . --values values.yaml -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace
```

### - G. Abort unsuccessful upgrade of a chart

When an upgrade is unsuccessful, and the `rollingUpdate` seems to fail, you might need to abort the upgrade. Here's how you do it:

If you know the **revision number** of the current successful chart, simply **rollback** to it:

```bash
helm rollback CHART_NAME REVISION_NUMBER -n NAMESPACE
```

If you need to check the current revision number, you can use the **history** command:

```bash
helm history backend -n NAMESPACE
```

---

## **2. Helm Commands**

### - Command 1: helm ls

**- The command:**

```bash
helm ls -n NAMESPACE
```

Or...

```bash
helm list -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

This command lists all of the releases for a specified namespace (uses current namespace context if namespace not specified).

<br/>

### - Command 2: helm uninstall

**- The command:**

```bash
helm uninstall RELEASE_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

Uninstall a release.

This command takes a release name and uninstalls the release. It removes all of the resources associated with the last release of the chart as well as the release history, freeing it up for future use.

<br/>

### - Command 3: helm install

**- The command:**

```bash
helm install chart_nickname path/to/root --values path/to/values.yaml -n NAMESPACE --debug
```

**- Description:**

This command installs a **chart** archive, and gives it a **nickname** which you provide.

- The `-f`, `--values` flags specify values in a YAML file or a URL (can specify multiple).
- The `--debug` flag enables verbose output.
- The `--dry-run` flag simulates an install. `--dry-run` is similar to `--dry-run=client`, which means that it will not attempt cluster connections, while setting `--dry-run=server` attempts to connect the cluster.
- The `--force` flag forces resource updates through a replacement strategy.
- The `--verify` flag verifies the package before using it.
- The `--wait` flag will wait until all Pods, PVCs, Services, and minimum number of Pods of a Deployment, StatefulSet, or ReplicaSet are in a **ready state** before marking the release as **successful**. It will wait for as long as `--timeout`.

The install argument must be a **chart reference**, a **path to a packaged chart**, a **path to an unpacked chart directory**, or a **URL**.

**When using a path to an unpacked chart directory:**

1. The `root` directory must include a `Chart.yaml` file.
2. Inside that `Chart.yaml` file, you **MUST** specify:
   - a `name` field
   - an `version` field
3. The `root` directory needs to include a folder named `templates`. This isn't required per-say, since the operation won't fail if one does not exist. However, even though running `helm ls` would show that a chart has been created, nothing would actually be deployed to your cluster! So while technically it is not required, it _is_ sort of required.
4. The `templates` folder is where you include all your yaml files, whether it be a config for a **deployment**, or a **service**, or a **configmap**. The names of the files don't matter, since kubernetes/helm looks inside the file and derives what resource it is based on its `Kind`.
5. The root folder may include a `values.yaml` file, to which you would point when invoking the `install` command, along with the flag of `--values`.

**Another way to set values**

To override values in a chart, use either the '--values' flag and pass in a file or use the '--set' flag and pass configuration from the command line, to force a string value use '--set-string'. You can use '--set-file' to set individual values from a file when the value itself is too long for the command line or is dynamically generated. You can also use '--set-json' to set json values (scalars/objects/arrays) from the command line.

**- Example Usage:**

```bash
helm install user ./user --values ./user/values.yaml -n NAMESPACE --create-namespace
```

<br/>

### - Command 4: helm status

**- The command: status**

```bash
helm status CHART_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

The `helm status` commands is useful when using the `helm install` command. When running `helm install`, Helm does not wait until all of the resources are running before it exits. Many charts require Docker images that are over 600MB in size, and may take a long time to install into the cluster. So, to keep track of a release's state, or to re-read configuration information, you can use `helm status`.

Display the status of the named release.

This command shows the status of a named release. The status consists of:

- last deployment time

- k8s namespace in which the release lives

- state of the release (can be: unknown, deployed, uninstalled, superseded, failed, uninstalling, pending-install, pending-upgrade or pending-rollback)

- revision of the release

- description of the release (can be completion message or error message, need to enable --show-desc)

- list of resources that this release consists of (need to enable --show-resources)

- details on last test suite run, if applicable

- additional notes provided by the chart

<br/>

### - Command 5: helm create

**- The command:**

```bash
helm create CHART_NAME
```

**- Description:**

create a new **chart** with the given name.

This command creates a chart directory along with the common files and directories used in a chart. `helm create` takes a _path_ for an argument. If directories in the given path do not exist, Helm will attempt to create them as it goes. If the given destination exists and there are files in that directory, conflicting files will be overwritten, but other files will be left alone.

For example, `helm create foo` will create a directory structure that looks something like this:

```
foo/
├── .helmignore   # Contains patterns to ignore when packaging Helm charts.
├── Chart.yaml    # Information about your chart
├── values.yaml   # The default values for your templates
├── charts/       # Charts that this chart depends on
└── templates/    # The template files
    └── tests/    # The test files
```

<br/>

### - Command 6: helm upgrade

**- The command:**

```bash
helm upgrade my-app path/to/root/ --values path/to/values.yaml -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

<br/>

### - Command 999: helm history

**- The command:**

```bash
helm history RELEASE_NAME -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

Fetch a release's history.

`history` prints out historical revisions for a given release. A default maximum of 256 revisions will be returned. Setting `--max` configures the maximum length of the revision list returned.

<br/>

### - Command 999: helm rollback

**- The command:**

```bash
helm rollback RELEASE_NAME REVISION_NUMBER -n NAMESPACE
```

**- Description:**

Roll back a release to a previous revision.

The first argument of the rollback command is the name of a release, and the second is a revision (version) number. _If this argument is omitted or set to 0, it will roll back to the **previous** release_.

<br/>

### - Command 999: helm package

**- The command:**

```bash
helm package path/to/root [flags] --version VERSION_NUMBER --debug
```

**- Description:**

Package a chart directory into a chart archive.

This command packages a chart into a **versioned** chart archive file. If a path is given, this will look at that path for a chart (which must contain a `Chart.yaml` file) and then package that directory.

Versioned chart archives are used by Helm package repositories.

To sign a chart, use the '--sign' flag. In most cases, you should also provide '--keyring path/to/secret/keys' and '--key keyname'.

```bash
helm package --sign ./mychart --key mykey --keyring ~/.gnupg/secring.gpg
```

If '--keyring' is not specified, Helm usually defaults to the public keyring unless your environment is otherwise configured.

<br/>

---

## 3. Helm Architecture

Prerequisites:

1. A Kubernetes cluster
2. Deciding what security configurations to apply to your installation, if any
3. Installing and configuring Helm.
4. You must have Kubernetes installed. For the latest release of Helm, we recommend the latest stable release of Kubernetes, which in most cases is the second-latest minor release.

Helm has 4 big concepts to it:

### - Concept 1: Chart

A **Chart** is a Helm package. It contains all of the resource definitions necessary to run an application, tool, or service inside of a Kubernetes cluster. Think of it like the Kubernetes equivalent of a Homebrew formula, an Apt dpkg, or a Yum RPM file.

### - Concept 2: Repository

A **Repository** is the place where charts can be collected and shared. It's like Perl's CPAN archive or the Fedora Package Database, but for Kubernetes packages.

### - Concept 3: Release

A **Release** is _an instance of a **chart**_ running inside a Kubernetes cluster. One chart can often be installed many times into the same cluster. And each time it is installed, a new **release** is created. Consider a MySQL chart. If you want two databases running in your cluster, you can install that chart twice. Each one will have its own **release**, which will in turn have its own _release name_.

With these concepts in mind, we can now explain Helm like this:

Helm installs **charts** into Kubernetes, creating a new **release** for each installation. And to find new charts, you can search Helm chart **repositories**.

```bash
helm show values
```

### - Concept 4: Tiller

**Tiller** is a component of Helm that runs inside the Kubernetes cluster. Tiller is what provides the functionality to apply the Kubernetes resource descriptions to the Kubernetes cluster. When you install a release, the helm client essentially packages up the values and charts as a release, which is submitted to Tiller.

---

## **4. What is helm?**

**Helm** is a **package manager** for **kubernetes**, that makes it easy to take applications and services that are highly repeatable or get used in a lot of different scenarios and it makes it easier to deploy them to a typical kubernetes cluster. chart = template. Your chart is going to consist of all the files that you're going to be templating here.
Helm talks to a component that needs to be installed on your kubernetes cluster called **Tiller**. Tiller is basically just the server-side component of helm. It's gonna take the commands you've sent with helm client, and turn it into something that your kubernetes cluster will understand. Now, this becomes extra useful when you wanna doo things like "upgrade to a new configuration" or "rollback to an older version".
What Helm will also give you is that it actually keeps a version history for you of different configurations you've sent over the wire with help, so you can rollback to the last known working configuration whenever you want to.
Good things to template:

- the `namespace`
- the `selector` name
- the `image`:
  - its `name`
  - its `tag`
- the `configmap.name`
  Create a NOTES.txt file, which outputs to the user on every upgrade command.
  This file could also be templated.
  You can create 1 values.yaml file for production and one for development.
