docs/programming/databases/mongodb.md, before:

# MongoDB

## 1. Installing mongoDB

### - A. Run a mongoDB server using docker

Go to the Official Image of mongo:

[https://hub.docker.com/\_/mongo](https://hub.docker.com/_/mongo)

In the "How to use this image" section, you'll see the following command:

```bash
docker run --name mongo -d -p 27017:27017 mongo:6
```

Or with a password:

```bash
docker run --name mongo -d -p 27017:27017 -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=mongoadmin -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret mongo
```

And, if you wanna add extra security, use a certificate:

```bash
docker run --name mongo -d \
  -p 27017:27017 \
  -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=mongoadmin \
  -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret \
  -v ~/Desktop/certificates:/certs:ro \
  mongo \
  --tlsMode requireTLS \
  --tlsCertificateKeyFile /certs/server.pem \
  --tlsCAFile /certs/rootCA.crt
```

You now should have a container running a **MongoDB server** listening on the standard MongoDB port **27017**.

You can check its logs using:

```bash
docker logs mongo
```

Or you can ssh into it using:

```bash
docker exec -it mongo bash
```

:::info
You can also be using **MongoDB Atlas**, which gives you your own personal remote mongoDB server for free.
:::

---

### - B. Install mongo CLI

You first need to install your **mongo cli** tool.

**- MacOS:**

Use `homebrew` to install (the official recommended way):

```bash
brew install mongocli
```

You now have access to the global command `mongosh`.

**- Windows:**

Go to: [https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongocli/current/](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongocli/current/)

And hit **Install MongoDB CLI**, then hit the **Download** button.

---

### - C. Connect to your remote server

To connect to your remote database, you can type one of two commands; One which includes your password, and one that isn't.

#### 1. Using CLI `mongosh`

In your terminal, run the following command:

```bash
mongosh "mongodb://localhost:27017"
```

Or if you have a password:

```bash
mongosh --host localhost:27017 --username mongoadmin --password secret --authenticationDatabase admin
```

Or if you have a certificate:

```bash
mongosh --tls --tlsCAFile rootCA.crt --tlsCertificateKeyFile client.pem --host localhost:27017 --username mongoadmin --password secret --authenticationDatabase admin
```

All of the commands below work as well:

```bash
mongosh localhost:27017
mongosh mongodb://localhost:27017
mongosh --host localhost --port 27017
mongosh --host localhost:27017
mongosh --host 127.0.0.1 --port 27017
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
Current Mongosh Log ID:	67909697207e4a089faba1d2
Connecting to:		mongodb://localhost:27017/?directConnection=true&serverSelectionTimeoutMS=2000&appName=mongosh+2.3.3
(node:56199) ExperimentalWarning: CommonJS module /opt/homebrew/Cellar/mongosh/2.3.3/libexec/lib/node_modules/@mongosh/cli-repl/node_modules/@mongodb-js/devtools-proxy-support/dist/fetch.js is loading ES Module /opt/homebrew/Cellar/mongosh/2.3.3/libexec/lib/node_modules/@mongosh/cli-repl/node_modules/node-fetch/src/index.js using require().
Support for loading ES Module in require() is an experimental feature and might change at any time
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
Using MongoDB:		6.0.20
Using Mongosh:		2.3.3

For mongosh info see: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/

------
   The server generated these startup warnings when booting
   2025-01-22T06:56:17.488+00:00: Using the XFS filesystem is strongly recommended with the WiredTiger storage engine. See http://dochub.mongodb.org/core/prodnotes-filesystem
   2025-01-22T06:56:18.084+00:00: Access control is not enabled for the database. Read and write access to data and configuration is unrestricted
   2025-01-22T06:56:18.084+00:00: /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled is 'always'. We suggest setting it to 'never' in this binary version
   2025-01-22T06:56:18.084+00:00: vm.max_map_count is too low
------

test>
```

You should now be able to run mongodb commands.

---

## 2. MongoDB Configuration

---

## 3. Most Used Commands

### - Way Number 1: Using MQL

**<font size="4">-- How to Query:</font>**

#### - Command 1: return the document with the **MAX/MIN HIGHEST SCORE**

```bash
db.users.find({},{ _id: 0, userID: 1}).sort({"userID": -1}).limit(1)
```

#### - Command 2: return only the records which **FIELD DOES/DOESN'T EXISTS**

```bash
db.users.find({ myField: { $exists : true } })
```

#### - Command 3: Does a field exist, is of type array, and **ARRAY CONTAINS AT LEAST ONE ELEMENT**?

```bash
db.users.find({ myArray : { $elemMatch : { $exists : true } } })
```

#### - Command 4: **COUNT HOW MANY** records are there that answer QUERY

```bash
db.users.find({<query>}).count()
```

#### - Command 5: return documents which FIELD IS NOT EQUAL TO some value

```bash
db.users.find({ userID: { $ne: 1 }})
```

#### - Command 6: return documents and PROJECT ONLY SOME FIELDS

```bash
db.users.find({} , { _id: 0, userID: 1, nickname: 1, email: 1 })
```

**<font size="4">-- How to Update:</font>**

When you don't want to use other fields values as reference, you can use this simple MQL operations, that don't include an aggregation pipeline.

#### - Command 1: **ADD NEW FIELD** to one/many/all documents

```bash
db.users.updateMany( { } ,{ $set: { newField: "defaultValue" } } )
```

:::note
NOTE! If the field already exists, it overrides its contents.
:::

#### - Command 2: **DELETE AN EXISTING FIELD** from all (similar to MySql's DROP COLUMN)

```bash
db.grades.updateMany( { studentID: 1 , classID: 460 } , { $unset: { arr1: "" , arr2: "" } } )
```

:::note
NOTE! If the field doesn't exist? updateMany does nothing.
:::

#### - Command 3: **ADD SUB-DOCUMENT TO ARRAY** field

```bash
db.users.updateMany( { userID: 1 } , { $addToSet: { iWatched: { userID:306, ...values } } } )
```

:::note
NOTE! The `$addToSet` doesn't really apply to an array containing sub-documents, in the sense that it will allow inserting a new sub-document with the same values.
:::

#### - Command 4: **DELETE SUB-DOCUMENT FROM ARRAY** field

```bash
db.users.updateMany( { userID: 1 } , { $pull: { iWatched: { userID: 306 } } } )
```

---

### - Way Number 2: Using Aggregation Pipelines

When you **NEED** to use other fields values as reference, you can use an aggregation pipeline MQL update operations. Though their names are the same (like $set and $unset), they work differently when inside a regular update or an aggregation pipeline update.

**<font size="4">-- How to Query:</font>**

#### - Command 1: ...

```bash
...
```

**<font size="4">-- How to Update:</font>**

#### - Command 1: Set field equal to another field

`$set` works exactly the same as it is in normal MQL update, only now you can use other fields values as references.

```bash
db.users.updateMany(
  {
    userID: 354,
  },
  [
    {
      $set: {
        'myPrefs.turnsMeOn': '$myDetails.turnsMeOn',
        'myPrefs.inPurposeOf': '$myDetails.inPurposeOf',
    },
  },
])
```

### - Command 2: Unset a field

`$unset` works differently in aggregation than in normal MQL update. If you try to apply `$unset` as its form in the normal MQL update within an aggregation update, you would get an error saying:

> `$unset` specification must be a string or an array

The proper way of applying $unset in an aggregation pipeline update is either by giving it a string with the field's name to unset, or an array of names in case there's more than 1 field you'd like to unset:

```bash
db.users.updateMany(
{
  userID: 354,
},
[
  {
    $unset: ['myDetails.turnsMeOn', 'myDetails.inPurposeOf']
  }
])
```

### - Command 3: Update a specific object inside an array field

The full form:

```bash
db.users.updateMany(
  {
    userID: 354,
  },
  {
    $set: {
      'messages.$[i].msgReadOnUnix': 1652348270,
  },
  {
    arrayFilters: [
      {
        $and: [
          { 'i.senderID': 306 },
          { 'i.msgReadOnUnix': -1 },
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
)
```

Explanation on how to use:

### - Part 1: `$[<identifier>]`

To achieve this, we use a normal MQL update, along with the familiar $set operation, only with a little twist. To reference an array cell, we need to use a special syntax of $\[IDENTIFIER\].

Like so:

```mongo
$set: { '<array>.$[<identifier>].fieldName': some-value }
```

### - Part 2: arrayFilters

In the third object parameter of the update operator, we provide an `arrayFilters`. `arrayFilters` is a special operator, that contains the conditions that would help determine which object inside the array are going to be updated. arrayFilters has a complex behavior, so in order to learn how to use it we need to discuss its rules, and how it behaves.

**-- ARRAY FILTER RULES**

1. Must be an array
   `arrayFilters` is followed by an array structure --> `arrayFilters: []`

2. A single filter - an object inside the array
   The array of arrayFilters contains objects which are filters. Now you must be thinking "Oh! Each object inside the array must be a filter in the sense that a filter means a single condition, that together have a relation of AND". Well... then no. Each object inside the array is a **reference to exactly one array**. What does it mean? Consider a case where you have an array of objects, and an object in that array contains another array within. MongoDB gives you a way to filter within that inner array! And that can be done by providing a **first** filter object that would filter by the first array, and a **second** filter object that would filter by the second array. In 99% percent of cases, you would have an arrayFilters that contains only 1 object in its top level. So now we know that the array of arrayFilters contains filter objects, that each object is a reference to an array in accordance to the level, and that in most cases we would only really need one filter for one top level array.

3. **AND** relation between **different** fields
   To get an **AND** relation effect between **different** inner fields, we simply add them one after another, line by line, like so:

```bash
arrayFilters: [{
  'i.userID': 306,
  'i.lastUpdated': { $lt: 555 }
}]
```

:::warning
**WARNING!**  
This implicit way of writing the AND relation can cause issues if you're using the **same** field name twice!
:::

In the example above, it is implied that we wish for an AND relation. We ask for userID 306 AND lastUpdated before 555. Even though the AND form has a default mode, you can always mention it explicitly:

```bash
arrayFilters: [{
  $and: [
    { 'i.userID': 306 },
    { 'i. lastUpdated':{ $lt: 555 }}
}]
```

Notice how many more notes need to be added to get the same result!

4. **AND** relation for the same key - duplicate key appearance

We saw that the filter in its default mode obscures an AND operation behind it, and that the filter has an object-like structure. Since the filter object is an object, a key **CANNOT** appear twice! It's not an error if it does, it's just that the last appearance of a key would override its predecessors.

Let's see an example:

```bash
arrayFilters: [{
  'i.userID': 306,
  'i.userID': 304,
  'i.userID':{ $lt: 2 }
}]
```

In the example above, only the third one would be taken into account.

5. **OR** relation between **_all_** fields

To get the effect of an OR relation, you must use the explicit way, like so:

```bash
To get the effect of an OR relation, you must use the explicit way, like so:
arrayFilters: [{
  $or: [
    { 'i.userID': 306 },
    { 'i. lastUpdated':{ $lt: 555 }}
}]
```

Commit message:

mongodb - added a link to certificates guide for creating a certificate

docs/programming/databases/mongodb.md, after:

# MongoDB

## 1. Installing mongoDB

### - A. Run a mongoDB server using docker

Go to the Official Image of mongo:

[https://hub.docker.com/\_/mongo](https://hub.docker.com/_/mongo)

In the "How to use this image" section, you'll see the following command:

```bash
docker run --name mongo -d -p 27017:27017 mongo:6
```

Or with a password:

```bash
docker run --name mongo -d -p 27017:27017 -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=mongoadmin -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret mongo
```

And, if you wanna add extra security, use a certificate:

```bash
docker run --name mongo -d \
  -p 27017:27017 \
  -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=mongoadmin \
  -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret \
  -v ~/Desktop/certificates:/certs:ro \
  mongo \
  --tlsMode requireTLS \
  --tlsCertificateKeyFile /certs/server.pem \
  --tlsCAFile /certs/rootCA.crt
```

:::info
See how to create a certificate over at the [certificates guide](/docs/programming/certificates#--step-1-create-2-private-keys---1-for-the-ca--1-for-the-server).
:::

You now should have a container running a **MongoDB server** listening on the standard MongoDB port **27017**.

You can check its logs using:

```bash
docker logs mongo
```

Or you can ssh into it using:

```bash
docker exec -it mongo bash
```

:::info
You can also be using **MongoDB Atlas**, which gives you your own personal remote mongoDB server for free.
:::

---

### - B. Install mongo CLI

You first need to install your **mongo cli** tool.

**- MacOS:**

Use `homebrew` to install (the official recommended way):

```bash
brew install mongocli
```

You now have access to the global command `mongosh`.

**- Windows:**

Go to: [https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongocli/current/](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongocli/current/)

And hit **Install MongoDB CLI**, then hit the **Download** button.

---

### - C. Connect to your remote server

To connect to your remote database, you can type one of two commands; One which includes your password, and one that isn't.

#### 1. Using CLI `mongosh`

In your terminal, run the following command:

```bash
mongosh "mongodb://localhost:27017"
```

Or if you have a password:

```bash
mongosh --host localhost:27017 --username mongoadmin --password secret --authenticationDatabase admin
```

Or if you have a certificate:

```bash
mongosh --tls --tlsCAFile rootCA.crt --tlsCertificateKeyFile client.pem --host localhost:27017 --username mongoadmin --password secret --authenticationDatabase admin
```

All of the commands below work as well:

```bash
mongosh localhost:27017
mongosh mongodb://localhost:27017
mongosh --host localhost --port 27017
mongosh --host localhost:27017
mongosh --host 127.0.0.1 --port 27017
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
Current Mongosh Log ID:	67909697207e4a089faba1d2
Connecting to:		mongodb://localhost:27017/?directConnection=true&serverSelectionTimeoutMS=2000&appName=mongosh+2.3.3
(node:56199) ExperimentalWarning: CommonJS module /opt/homebrew/Cellar/mongosh/2.3.3/libexec/lib/node_modules/@mongosh/cli-repl/node_modules/@mongodb-js/devtools-proxy-support/dist/fetch.js is loading ES Module /opt/homebrew/Cellar/mongosh/2.3.3/libexec/lib/node_modules/@mongosh/cli-repl/node_modules/node-fetch/src/index.js using require().
Support for loading ES Module in require() is an experimental feature and might change at any time
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
Using MongoDB:		6.0.20
Using Mongosh:		2.3.3

For mongosh info see: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/

------
   The server generated these startup warnings when booting
   2025-01-22T06:56:17.488+00:00: Using the XFS filesystem is strongly recommended with the WiredTiger storage engine. See http://dochub.mongodb.org/core/prodnotes-filesystem
   2025-01-22T06:56:18.084+00:00: Access control is not enabled for the database. Read and write access to data and configuration is unrestricted
   2025-01-22T06:56:18.084+00:00: /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled is 'always'. We suggest setting it to 'never' in this binary version
   2025-01-22T06:56:18.084+00:00: vm.max_map_count is too low
------

test>
```

You should now be able to run mongodb commands.

---

## 2. MongoDB Configuration

---

## 3. Most Used Commands

### - Way Number 1: Using MQL

**<font size="4">-- How to Query:</font>**

#### - Command 1: return the document with the **MAX/MIN HIGHEST SCORE**

```bash
db.users.find({},{ _id: 0, userID: 1}).sort({"userID": -1}).limit(1)
```

#### - Command 2: return only the records which **FIELD DOES/DOESN'T EXISTS**

```bash
db.users.find({ myField: { $exists : true } })
```

#### - Command 3: Does a field exist, is of type array, and **ARRAY CONTAINS AT LEAST ONE ELEMENT**?

```bash
db.users.find({ myArray : { $elemMatch : { $exists : true } } })
```

#### - Command 4: **COUNT HOW MANY** records are there that answer QUERY

```bash
db.users.find({<query>}).count()
```

#### - Command 5: return documents which FIELD IS NOT EQUAL TO some value

```bash
db.users.find({ userID: { $ne: 1 }})
```

#### - Command 6: return documents and PROJECT ONLY SOME FIELDS

```bash
db.users.find({} , { _id: 0, userID: 1, nickname: 1, email: 1 })
```

**<font size="4">-- How to Update:</font>**

When you don't want to use other fields values as reference, you can use this simple MQL operations, that don't include an aggregation pipeline.

#### - Command 1: **ADD NEW FIELD** to one/many/all documents

```bash
db.users.updateMany( { } ,{ $set: { newField: "defaultValue" } } )
```

:::note
NOTE! If the field already exists, it overrides its contents.
:::

#### - Command 2: **DELETE AN EXISTING FIELD** from all (similar to MySql's DROP COLUMN)

```bash
db.grades.updateMany( { studentID: 1 , classID: 460 } , { $unset: { arr1: "" , arr2: "" } } )
```

:::note
NOTE! If the field doesn't exist? updateMany does nothing.
:::

#### - Command 3: **ADD SUB-DOCUMENT TO ARRAY** field

```bash
db.users.updateMany( { userID: 1 } , { $addToSet: { iWatched: { userID:306, ...values } } } )
```

:::note
NOTE! The `$addToSet` doesn't really apply to an array containing sub-documents, in the sense that it will allow inserting a new sub-document with the same values.
:::

#### - Command 4: **DELETE SUB-DOCUMENT FROM ARRAY** field

```bash
db.users.updateMany( { userID: 1 } , { $pull: { iWatched: { userID: 306 } } } )
```

---

### - Way Number 2: Using Aggregation Pipelines

When you **NEED** to use other fields values as reference, you can use an aggregation pipeline MQL update operations. Though their names are the same (like $set and $unset), they work differently when inside a regular update or an aggregation pipeline update.

**<font size="4">-- How to Query:</font>**

#### - Command 1: ...

```bash
...
```

**<font size="4">-- How to Update:</font>**

#### - Command 1: Set field equal to another field

`$set` works exactly the same as it is in normal MQL update, only now you can use other fields values as references.

```bash
db.users.updateMany(
  {
    userID: 354,
  },
  [
    {
      $set: {
        'myPrefs.turnsMeOn': '$myDetails.turnsMeOn',
        'myPrefs.inPurposeOf': '$myDetails.inPurposeOf',
    },
  },
])
```

### - Command 2: Unset a field

`$unset` works differently in aggregation than in normal MQL update. If you try to apply `$unset` as its form in the normal MQL update within an aggregation update, you would get an error saying:

> `$unset` specification must be a string or an array

The proper way of applying $unset in an aggregation pipeline update is either by giving it a string with the field's name to unset, or an array of names in case there's more than 1 field you'd like to unset:

```bash
db.users.updateMany(
{
  userID: 354,
},
[
  {
    $unset: ['myDetails.turnsMeOn', 'myDetails.inPurposeOf']
  }
])
```

### - Command 3: Update a specific object inside an array field

The full form:

```bash
db.users.updateMany(
  {
    userID: 354,
  },
  {
    $set: {
      'messages.$[i].msgReadOnUnix': 1652348270,
  },
  {
    arrayFilters: [
      {
        $and: [
          { 'i.senderID': 306 },
          { 'i.msgReadOnUnix': -1 },
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
)
```

Explanation on how to use:

### - Part 1: `$[<identifier>]`

To achieve this, we use a normal MQL update, along with the familiar $set operation, only with a little twist. To reference an array cell, we need to use a special syntax of $\[IDENTIFIER\].

Like so:

```mongo
$set: { '<array>.$[<identifier>].fieldName': some-value }
```

### - Part 2: arrayFilters

In the third object parameter of the update operator, we provide an `arrayFilters`. `arrayFilters` is a special operator, that contains the conditions that would help determine which object inside the array are going to be updated. arrayFilters has a complex behavior, so in order to learn how to use it we need to discuss its rules, and how it behaves.

**-- ARRAY FILTER RULES**

1. Must be an array
   `arrayFilters` is followed by an array structure --> `arrayFilters: []`

2. A single filter - an object inside the array
   The array of arrayFilters contains objects which are filters. Now you must be thinking "Oh! Each object inside the array must be a filter in the sense that a filter means a single condition, that together have a relation of AND". Well... then no. Each object inside the array is a **reference to exactly one array**. What does it mean? Consider a case where you have an array of objects, and an object in that array contains another array within. MongoDB gives you a way to filter within that inner array! And that can be done by providing a **first** filter object that would filter by the first array, and a **second** filter object that would filter by the second array. In 99% percent of cases, you would have an arrayFilters that contains only 1 object in its top level. So now we know that the array of arrayFilters contains filter objects, that each object is a reference to an array in accordance to the level, and that in most cases we would only really need one filter for one top level array.

3. **AND** relation between **different** fields
   To get an **AND** relation effect between **different** inner fields, we simply add them one after another, line by line, like so:

```bash
arrayFilters: [{
  'i.userID': 306,
  'i.lastUpdated': { $lt: 555 }
}]
```

:::warning
**WARNING!**  
This implicit way of writing the AND relation can cause issues if you're using the **same** field name twice!
:::

In the example above, it is implied that we wish for an AND relation. We ask for userID 306 AND lastUpdated before 555. Even though the AND form has a default mode, you can always mention it explicitly:

```bash
arrayFilters: [{
  $and: [
    { 'i.userID': 306 },
    { 'i. lastUpdated':{ $lt: 555 }}
}]
```

Notice how many more notes need to be added to get the same result!

4. **AND** relation for the same key - duplicate key appearance

We saw that the filter in its default mode obscures an AND operation behind it, and that the filter has an object-like structure. Since the filter object is an object, a key **CANNOT** appear twice! It's not an error if it does, it's just that the last appearance of a key would override its predecessors.

Let's see an example:

```bash
arrayFilters: [{
  'i.userID': 306,
  'i.userID': 304,
  'i.userID':{ $lt: 2 }
}]
```

In the example above, only the third one would be taken into account.

5. **OR** relation between **_all_** fields

To get the effect of an OR relation, you must use the explicit way, like so:

```bash
To get the effect of an OR relation, you must use the explicit way, like so:
arrayFilters: [{
  $or: [
    { 'i.userID': 306 },
    { 'i. lastUpdated':{ $lt: 555 }}
}]
```
